Learning about the DOM Selection and Events in JavaScript.

Selection of elements in the DOM is one of the most frequently used operations when using JavaScript in the browser. The methods such as, getElementById, getElementsByClassName and querySelector assist you to find the elements but their use varies to some extent as getElementById is the simplest and direct method as it will return a single element which matches the given ID. This is simple and effective because IDs are supposedly one-of-a-kind, whereas getElementsByClassName will give a list of various elements with the same class. It provides you with a live collection, i.e. in case the DOM is modified, the collection is updated automatically. Next there is querySelector and querySelectorAll which is more liberal since it is capable of taking a complete CSS selector, querySelector only allows the first one whereas querySelectorAll allows all matches but in a static list that does not automatically update. QuerySelector methods tend to be more preferable in case you need flexibility and intricate selection.

The development and addition of new contents into the DOM are done in a simple logical manner. The initial step is to create the element with document.createElement. Here it is only in memory, not on paper. Then you personalize it with the addition of text, attributes or classes. Lastly you would plug it into the DOM with such methods as append, appendchild or prepend. The browser will not render it until you insert it in an existing element in the document. One should comprehend that division between creation and insertion.

Another important concept in JavaScript is event handling. Event bubbling is one of such behaviors. When something occurs on an element(such as clicking a button) the event does not end there. It originally fires at the target element, then it propagates upwards to its parent then their parent, etc., all the way up to the document. It implies that several event listeners are allowed to respond to the same action provided they are subscribers to parent elements. The bubbling explanation aids in understanding why there are times when you made one click on an element but several handlers were executing.

Bubbling is used in event delegation. You do not need several event listeners on child elements, but on its parent. Since events bubble up, the parent is able to know which child caused the event. This method enhances performance, eliminates repetitive code and even works in case dynamic elements are added later. Event delegation can be a more intelligent design than event notification in large or dynamic applications.

Lastly, preventDefault and stop prop are used to regulate the various behaviors of events. prevent default prevents the default behavior of the browser e.g. preventing the submission of a form or clicking on a hyperlink. Nevertheless, it does not prevent the bubbling of the event, stopPropagation, on the other hand, prevents the event to pass through the parent elements, which stops parent handlers to execute; however, it does not interfere with the default actions of the browser. They also resolve various issues and when they are confused it can create bugs.

In total, once you have mastered these concepts, you have good command over the way your web applications respond to actions as well as how they interact with the users.
